.\" Copyright 2024, Sven Schober <av3sch@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.TH matopdf 1 (date) "MaTo Tools man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
matopdf
\-
transform markdown files into PDF using groff
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY matopdf
.RB [ \-dgGhltvVwZ ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR lang ]
.I file
.YS
.
.P
.SY matopdf
.B \-h
.YS
.
.SY matopdf
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B matopdf
parses a markdown file and transforms it to
.MR groff 1
format with macro usage of the
.MR groff_mom 1
package.
Then it uses
.I groff
to produce an output PDF file
using the
.MR gropdf 1
output device.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.B \-h
and
.B \-\-help
display a usage message and exit.
.
.
.TP 9n \" "-m name" + 2n
.B \-d, --debug
Enable debug output. Implies
.BR \-v ,
and is superseeded by
.BR \-t .
.
.TP
.B \-g, --dump-groff
Dump generated
.I groff
output text to standard output stream.
.
.TP
.B \-G, --dump-groff-file
Dump generated
.I groff
output text to a file. The file name is
created by stripping the
.I md
suffix and appending
.IR groff .
.
.TP
.BI \-l\~ lang, --lang\~ lang
Set
.IR groff 's 
language localization to
.IR lang .
This can be
.BR en ", " de ", or " den .
Please, consult
.MR groff_tmac 1
for a complete list of valid languages.
.
.TP
.B \-t, --trace
Enable trace output. Implies
.BR \-v\~ and\~ \-d .
.
.TP
.B \-v, --version
Print the command version and exit.
.
.TP
.B \-w, --watch
Enable
.IR "watch mode" .
Watches for changes on source files and automatically reruns the
transformation in case the watches file was written to.
.
.TP
.B \-Z, --skip-render-and-dump
Skips feeding the generated
.I groff
output to
.I gropdf
and instead dumps it onto standard output stream.
.
.
.SH USAGE
.
In general,
.I matopdf
does
.B not
work like a standard UNIX filter, but uses a substitution
to generate an output file name, to which the target PDF
file content is written.
In part this decision to deviate from
.I groff
best-practices was motivated by a 
.I batteries included
philosophy and in part by complications this filter patter
would have introduced when using the 
.IR "watch mode" :
A target file can continuously be overwritten, whereas the
semantics of constantly piping PDFs to standard out would be
not intuitively clear.
.SS Styling
You can change the styling of the rendered pdf output using
standard
.I mom
elements, as are described in
.MR groff_mom 1
or the html documentation located at 
.UR https://\:www.\:schaffter\:.ca\:/mom\:/momdoc\:/toc.html
.UE
.P
To change the styling, put your
.I mom
statement in a file called
.I preamble.mom
next to your mark\%down input file. 
.P
.I mato
defines a default styling in a file called
.IR default-pramble.mom .
You can study the defaults it sets in the file installed
under TODO.
.
.SS Watch Mode
.
.I matopdf
has a blocking mode, called
.I watch mode
in which it performs one transformation and rendering process
and then, instead of exiting, waits for changes on the input
file.
.P
This waiting is done using
.I kernel queues
(see
.MR kqueue 2 )
a BSD concept, available natively on Mac OS X, BSDs and Linux.
.SH EXAMPLES
Use the following command line 
.P
.EX
.RB $\~ "matopdf sample.md"
.EE
.P
to transform a simple markdown
file into a PDF file
.IR sample.pdf .
.P
To inspect the groff formatted output that
.I matopdf
generates, use the
.B \-Z
flag, like so:
.P
.EX
.RB $\~ "matopdf -Z sample.md"
\&.DOCTYPE CHAPTER HEADER "\*[$TITLE]" "" "" FOOTER "\*[$AUTHOR]" "" ""
\&.PRINTSTYLE TYPESET
\&.PAGE 5.8i 9i 1i 1i .75i .75i
\&.PAPER A5
\&...
\&.START
\&.SPACE -.7v
\&.EW 2
\&.HEADING 3 "Motivation"
\&.EW 0
\&...
.EE
.P
Please note, that this will
.B not
produce an output pdf file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR groff 1 ,
.MR gropdf 1
